Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on
22 March, 2023
         Cause Title/Judgement-Entry                   STATE CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL
Reserved
State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
U.P. Lucknow.
Complaint  No. 337 of 2016
1- Sadanand Choudhary, aged about 40 years,
    S/o Babue Lal Chaudhary, R/o (presently
    Residing)-1608, Solook Dr. Parlin, New Jersey-
    08856, United States of America.
    Permanent Address, JAC 06.10, Shipra Sun
    City, Indirapuram, Ghaziabad, UP 201014
2- Mrs. Sulekha Choudhary, aged about 37 years,
    W/o Sadanand Chaudhary, R/o (presently
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
1
    Residing)-1608, Solook Dr. Parlin, New Jersey-
    08856, United States of America.
    Permanent Address, JAC 06.10, Shipra Sun
    City, Indirapuram, Ghaziabad, UP 201014
3- Through their Authorized Agent/Representative
     Sachidanand Choudhary (Brother) aged about 32 years,
     S/o Babue Lal Choudhary, R/o F-2/835,
     Sector-5, Vaishali, Ghaziabad-201010
                                                                      ...Complainants.
                                Versus
1- Amprapali Castle, Amrapali Group, M/s Ultra
    Home Construction Pvt. Ltd., Regd. Off. 307,
    3rd Floor, Nipun Towers, Karkardooma
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
2
    Community Center, Delhi-93
2- Amprapali Castle, Amrapali Group, M/s Ultra
    Home Construction Pvt. Ltd., Corporate Office,
    at C-56/40, Sec-62, Noida U.P.
                                                        ....Opposite Parties.
Present:-
1- Hon'ble Shri Rajendra Singh, Presiding Member.
2- Hon'ble Sri Sushil Kumar, Member.
Sri Kumar Sambhav, Advocate for complainants.
None for Opposite Parties.
Date  26.04.2023
 JUDGMENT
Per Mr. Rajendra Singh, Member: This complaint has been filed under section 17 of the Consumer
Protection Act 1986.
          The brief facts of the complaint case are that, that the complainants were looking for a flat for
their personal use as residence. They came to know about the project of above mentioned opposite
party in Greater Noida namely "Amprapali Castle" and believing in high claims made by the
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
3
opposite party about their project, the complainant decided to purchase a flat for their residence. On
14.06.2010 they booked a flat by    paying booking amount of Rs.1 85,000/- bearing recipe number
3058 and got the allotment letter.
After getting satisfied from the claims of opposite party, the complainant entered into agreement on
01.07.2010 with opposite party for "Amprapali Castle" Tower/Block - A, unit no A-1304, floor 13th,
type II BHK (1075), Super Area-1075 square ft on basic sale price of Rs.1,854,375/- with amount of
Rs.295,625/- as other charges including one covered car parking, lease rent (one-time) EEC , FFC ,
power backup (two KVA) club membership charges. Total other charges were Rs.317,125/-, and total
cost of the flat/unit was Rs.2,171,500/- and the project was situated at GH-04A, sector CHI-V,
Greater Noida. As per the agreement (para-19-a) the opposite party has to complete the
development/ construction of the complainant for flat by 31 July 2012 and within an extended
period of 03 months thereof. But till date opposite party is not in a position to handover the
possession.
Till 23.07.2016 an amount of Rs.1,709,063/- has been paid which is shown in the demand letter
dated 23.07.2016 of the opposite party. After receiving the demand letter which shows outstanding
payment of Rs.544,827/- which includes the amount of Rs.185,438/- at the time of finishing work
and an amount of Rs.317,121/- at the time of possession. An email was received by the opposite
party on 29.07.2016 through some Sonia Gupta in which an amount of Rs.200,000/- asked for
finishing of flat and the same was deposited in the account of opposite party without any delay on
30.07.2016.
Till 30.06.2014, there was already delay of 23 months in completing the house and the total penalty
was due on the opposite party was Rs.247,250/- which is more than the amount of Rs.185,438/-
which was due at the start of finishing of the house. Total amount of Rs.1,709,063/- plus Rs.2 lakh
total Rs.1,909,063/- has been paid by the complainants and the rest amount of Rs.262,437/- is only
due to be paid at the time of possession. The complainant has paid all the payments as per the
payment schedule provided by the opposite parties and complainant has paid more than eighth
schedule of finishing work and the complainants are ready to pay all the outstanding dues as per the
payment schedule on possession. But the opposite party is asking for full and final payment before
they finish the apartment and asking for an additional 60 days to finish the flat, which is beyond the
payment schedule as well as beyond the terms and conditions of the agreement between the parties.
It has been specifically mentioned by the opposite party in para-19 (c) of the agreement that, "in
case of delay in construction of the flat for reasons other than force majeure conditions, the
developer shall pay a sum of Rs.10/- per square ft. of super area per month for the delayed period,
which shall include of any/all damages, compensation, claims for delayed possession". As per
agreement super area of the flat is 1075 square ft therefore the amount will come Rs.10,050/- per
month and from July 31, 2102 till date, 50 months have passed so the amount of damages comes
Rs.5,37,500/- (10,750 x 50 = 5,37,500). The complainant and opposite party has exchanged many
emails but opposite party is silent on paying the delay charges which is payable by them to the
complainants and asking for undue full and final payment before the possession which is violation
of terms and condition of agreement in which it has been specifically mentioned that other charges
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
4
amounting Rs.317,121/- is only due once the house is finished and ready for possession.
As per the agreement/calculation of the outstanding delay payment which has to be paid by the
opposite parties to the complainant comes to Rs.537,500/- and the amount which has repaid by the
complainants to opposite party is Rs.262,437/- which clearly shows that an amount of Rs.275,063/-
is due on the opposite parties as per their agreement which has to be paid to the complainants.
Asking for full and final payment before possession is illegal because as per calculation no
outstanding dues rest on the complainant and instead of complainant's dues comes on opposite
parties. There is apprehension that after paying the full and final payment, the complainant will not
get the complete finished flat as per the agreement as well as the opposite parties will not pay the
delay charges due on them. The agreement made by the opposite parties is also not on similar
footing for both the parties as per the agreement if delay is made by the complainant in payment,
complainants had to pay 25% interest on amount to opposite party and if delay is on the part of the
opposite party, they will pay Rs.10/- per square feet per month which is equal to approximately 6%
to per annum interest. It shows that the agreement is made only in the interest of opposite party
which is gross restrictive trade practice as well as unfair trade practice and deficiency in service.
After payment of 90% of the consideration amount, opposite parties cancelled the allotment so that
they don't have to pay their delay charges amounting to Rs.537,500/- and can sell it at higher price
through unfair means. The opposite parties are enjoying the complainant's hard earned money and
making his profit of his total amount paid Rs.1,909,063/-. Therefore it is most humbly prayed that
this Hon'ble commission may be pleased to pass order directing the opposite party to hand over the
physical possession of flat by registered sale deed along with delay payment as due from 31.07.2012
until delivery of physical possession of the flat in question with interest at a rate of 18% per annum.
It is further prayed that a sum of Rs.5 Lacs may also be awarded to the complainant on account of
gross unfair trade practices and deficiency in services, mental agony, physical harassment. A sum of
Rs.550,00/-  may also be awarded to the complainant towards cost of the case. Any relief which may
deem fit and appropriate under the facts and circumstances of the case may also be awarded to the
complainant.
The opposite parties have filed their written statement stating that  the complainants approached
the opposite party for purchase of a flat in the project "Amprapali Castle" and after satisfying
themselves in all respect applied for booking of a flat and accordingly the complainants on
14.06.2010 booked a two BHK flat bearing number A-1304 on floor 13th for a total sale
consideration of Rs.2,171,500/-. The complainants assigned and executed the flat buyer agreement
with the opposite party on 01.07.2010 specifically agreeing for the payment schedule, specifications,
date of possession, force majeure conditions, penalty in case of delay in construction of the flat et
cetera in respect of the booked flat. In the terms of clause 19 (a) of FBA (Flat Buyer Agreement), the
opposite party is required to complete the development of the construction of the flat by 31 July
2012 with an extended period of three months thereof, however such completion date is subject to
force majeure conditions and/or subject to any other reasons beyond the control of the opposite
party. The clause 19 (a) is reproduced below:
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
5
Clause 19 (a)-"that the developer shall complete the development/construction of the
flat by 31 July 2012 and within an extended period of three months thereof. The
completion date was subject to force majeure conditions. No claim by way of
damages/compensation shall lie against the developer in case of delay in handing
over the possession on account of force majeure and the developer shall be entitled to
a reasonable extension of time for the delivery of possession of the flat to the allottee.
Clause 19 (c) of the FBA "In case of delay in construction of the said flat for reasons
other than force majeure conditions, the developer shall pay a sum at the rate of
Rs.10 per square ft of super area per month for delayed period, which shall include of
any/all damages, compensation, claims for delayed possession"
The present complaint is frivolous, vague, vexatious, incorrect and baseless and the
complainants have failed to disclose any tenable cause of action. This complaint is
not maintainable as it has filed with ulterior motive and malafide intention to make a
wrongful gain themselves and wrongful loss to the opposite party. The complainants
have claimed compensation in terms of clause 19 (a) of the FBA, however such
payment of compensation subject to force majeure conditions and the delay in
completion of the project cannot and shall not be attributed on the opposite party.
The labourers and staffs employed by the opposite party in the construction of the
said project went on strike many times during the last five years and the project
remained affected on account of such frequent strikes by the labourers and staffs.
The construction work of the said project remained halted completely every year
during the rainy seasons due to heavy rains which is also resulted into delay in the
completion of the project. The delay has further occasioned in the completion of the
construction of the said flat due to the agitations of farmers of different villages in
Gautam Budh Nagar. The farmers have persistently obstructed and disturbed
construction of different projects in Gautam Budh Nagar District. A large number of
writ petitions were also filed by the farmers/tenure holders before the Hon'ble High
Court of Allahabad challenging acquisition of their lands of different villages By State
Government. The land allotted to the opposite party by GNIDA was part of the village
Chuharpur  Khadar and the said village was emotional villages whose acquisition was
challenged by the farmers/tenure holders in different writ petitions. Most of the
farmers/tenure holders filed their writ petitions in 2011 much after the allotment of
land to the opposite party. The opposite party is entitled for extension of period in
completion of construction of from April 2011 to 21.10.2011.
 
The Hon'ble High Court, Allahabad had decided the batch of writ petitions vide its
final order and judgment dated 21.10.2011 directing the payment of enhanced
compensation and more developed land for the acquired land of the farmers/tenure
holders. So the project was severally affected during the pendency of these writ
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
6
petitions. The Hon'ble Allahabad High Court vide its order dated 21.10.2011 also
directed "Greater NOIDA and its allottees not to carry on development and not to
implement the master plan to 2021 till the Observations and Directions of the
National Capital Regional Planning Board are incorporated in Marshall Plan 2021 to
the satisfaction of the National Capital Regional Planning Board".
In compliance to the direction of the Hon'ble Allahabad High Court, no development/construction
work took place on the said project from 21.10.2011. In compliance of the order of the Hon'ble
Allahabad High Court, the GNIDA vide its letter dated 28.5.2012 also informed that no construction
work on the said project  could be done till the approval of Greater Noida Master Plan-2021 by
National Capital Regional Planning Board. The GNIDA vide its letter datd 21.9.2012 informed the
opposite party that the construction work on the said project could be resumed in terms of letter
dated 27.8.2012. The opposite party had resumed the construction work on the said project only
after 21.9.2012. The construction work remained stopped for 11 months from 21.10.2011 till 21.9.212
due to aforesaid reasons which are force majeure circumstances and cannot and shall not be
attributed on the opposite party. The opposite party is entitled for extension of period in completion
of construction of flat from 21.10.2011 till 21.9.2012.
The farmers/tenure holders pursuant to order dated 21.10.2011 protested against GNIDA for giving
of enhanced compensation and not allotting the additional developed land as per the judgment
dated 21.10.2011 and construction work at the project site was again halted by the farmers/tenure
holders for months. These circumstances were beyond the control of the opposite party and the
project was delayed. The delay occasioned is covered under force majeure circumstances as agreed
by the complainants under clause 19(c) of FBA and the opposite party is not liable to pay the delayed
compensation on account of such delay.
The construction of project was also slowed down due to restriction of extraction of ground water for
construction purposes, which restriction was imposed by the Hon'ble Ntional Green Tribunal, New
Delhi (hereinafter referred to as "NGT") in an application bearing OA no.59 of 2012 titled Vikrant
Kumar Tongad vs. Union of India & ors. wherein the Tribunal has directed to all developers in
Noida and Greater Noida not to extract any ground water for the construction purposes vide its
order dated 11.1.2013. due to such order, the Developers in Noida and Greatoer Noida were even
barred from removing ground water which was seeped into the basement area due to excavation for
laying foundation of buildings. The development/construction work in the said project was also
affected by such order.
The Noida authority also filed Civil Appeal (D) no.17991 of 2013 filed before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court challenging the order dated 8.1.2013 passed by the NGT. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its
order dated 14.6.2013 modified the order dated 8.1.2013 passed by the NGT and allowed the
affected developers to remove the water which has seeped into the basement or enclosing the
foundation of the building under construction and after such order the construction could be
resumed. The Hon'ble Supreme Court disposed off the civil appeal no.4798 of 2013 (civil appeal (D)
no.17991 of 2013) on 18.10.2013 and confirmed its order dated 14.6.2013.           
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
7
The construction/development of the project has already been completed and the opposite party has
issued possession intimation letter to the complainant and requested to make the balance sale
consideration payable by the complainants at the time of possession intimation and accordingly to
obtain NOC so that the finishing work can be completed. The complainants have not paid the
balance sale consideration till date and failed to comply the terms of the FBA. The opposite party
has also sent a reminder on possession intimation letter dated 6.8.2015 requesting the complainants
to collect the NOC after due formalities so that the finishing work is initiated and unit is made ready
for their occupation in reasonable time.
The complainants despite of the several requests made by the opposite party showed their lethargic
attitude for compliance of the formalities. The opposite party seeing the continuous failure of the
complainants towards completing the dues and other formalities also sent a cancellation letter dated
31.8.2015 due to non-payment of the dues to the complainants. The opposite party vide this letter
again requested the complainants to make good the due payment within 10 days of which is
hampering the construction work and resulting in delayed completion of the project.
The complainant has not paid the installment against the cost of the allotted flat as per the agreed
schedule and an interest of Rs.3,28,749.00 is accumulated on account of such delay which has not
been paid by the complainants till date. The opposite party is not liable for any deficiency of services
on account of delay in handling over of possession of the flat  caused due to force majeure
circumstances as mentioned above rather it is the complainants who have delayed the payment of
due installments against consideration of the said flat. The complainants have failed to comply the
terms and conditions under the FBA and are not entitled for any relief much less claimed under the
captioned complaint. Therefore, the complaint of complainants does not hold any merit and liable to
be dismissed on this ground alone.
It is submitted that the complainants are NRI are presently residing at New Jersey, United States of
America. In reply to the contents that believing in high claims made by the opposite party about
their project it is submitted that the opposite party is well known for its commitment towards its
valuable customers for the timely delivery of quality products and for providing the highest level of
satisfaction to its customers. The rest of the contents of the para under reply are matter of record.
It is submitted that complainants have delayed the payment as per agreed payment schedule and an
interest of Rs.3,28,749.00 has accumulated on account of such delay which has not been paid by the
complainants till date for which they are liable to pay before handing over of the possession of he
said flat. It is further submitted that an amount of Rs.3,09,260.00 excluding applicable taxes
against the balance sale consideration of the said flat is still pending payment by the complainants
to the opposite party.
It is submitted that the paid amount of Rs.19,09,063.00 includes the applicable tax component. It is
further submitted that an amount of Rs.3,09,260.00 excluding applicable taxes against the balance
sale consideration of the said flat is still pending payment by the complainants to the opposite party.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
8
It is submitted that the opposite party has issued the possession intimation letter and demand letter
to make he payment against balance sale consideration so that the process for possession can be
initiated. The said flat of the complainants is also ready for possession and only some internal work
such as painting, texture work, kitchen work etc. has been left which shall only be completed in
consultation with the complainants when the complainants shall make the balance payment as per
agreement.
It is submitted that the complainants are not taking possession of the said flat with malafide
intention to delay the payment due at the time of possession intimation. It is submitted that the
opposite party has been developing the project in time bound manner and if any delay in
construction has been caused, the same has been caused due to the force majeure conditions beyond
the control of the opposite party as  explained in the preceding paras of this  reply. The rest of the
contents are legal averments and hence, needs no reply.     
It is submitted that whatever delay has been caused in handing the possession of the said flat to the
complainants, the same has been caused due to force majeure conditions and/or the reasons beyond
the control of the opposite party as explained in the preceding paras of this reply and the same are
not repeated herein for the sake of brevity. It is further submitted that the complainants have
deliberately not taking possession of the said flat after making payment of the balance amount to the
opposite party and cannot and shall not claim deficiency in service and gross unfair trade practice,
restrictive trade practice for their own default. It is submitted that in the garb of the captioned
complaint, the complainants are delaying the balance payment and delaying the process of handing
over the said flat for which the complainants are themselves responsible.   
We have heard the learned counsel for the complainants Sri Kumar Sambhav. None appeared for 
the opposite parties. Sri Rajesh Chaddha. We have perused the pleadings, documents and evidence
on the record.
In this case the complainant has booked a flat in the opposite parties project to on 14.06.2010. The
parties entered into an agreement dated 01.07.2010. As per the para 19a of the agreement the
opposite party has to complete the development/construction of the flat by 31 July 2012 and within
an extended period of three months thereof. In the same agreement it has been specifically
mentioned in clause 19 (c) that in case of delay in the construction of the flat for reasons other than
force majeure conditions, the development pay a sum of Rs.10 per square ft of super area and the
super area of the flat is 1025 square ft, so by calculating the delay in terms of money, it comes
Rs.10,050/- per month from July 31, 2012. Till the date of filing of the complaint case, 50 month
have been passed so the amount of damages Rs.537,500/- but the opposite parties remained silent
on this issue and did not answer about the delay payment.
Before going further we have to see the main objects of the Consumer Protection Act 1986. This act
has been promulgated for the benefit of the consumers.
What are the main objectives of consumer protection act?
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
9
The Consumer Protection Act, came into existence and implemented in 1986, provides Consumer
Rights to prevent consumers from fraud or specified unfair practices. It safeguards and encourages
and gives an opportunity to consumers to speak against insufficiency and flaws in goods and
services. If traders, manufacturers and distributors follow any foul trade, this act protects their
rights as a consumer.
On which products are these right applicable?
This Protection Act covers entire goods and services of all sectors that are public, private, or
cooperative sectors, except those exempted by the central government. The act provides a floor for a
consumer where one can file their complaint against the product and the forum takes an action
against the concerned supplier and compensation is granted to the consumer for the inconvenience
he/she has encountered.
Objectives of consumer protection act To Provide better and all round protection to consumer.
To Provide machinery for the speedy redressal of the grievances.
To Create framework for consumers to seek redressal.
To Provide rights to consumers.
To Safeguarde rights of Consumers.
Let us know more about the rights and responsiblities of consumer Consumer Rights Listed below
are the Rights of the Consumer Right to Safety- Before buying, a consumer can examine on the
quality and guarantee of the goods and opt for ISI or AGMARK products.
Right to Choose- Consumer must have the right to choose from a variety and number of goods and
in a competitive price Right to be informed- The buyers must be provided with complete
information with all the necessary and adequate details of the product, make her/him act wise, and
change the buying decision.
Right to Consumer Education- The consumer must be aware of his/her rights and avoid
exploitation.
Right to be heard- The consumer will get due attention to express their grievances at a suitable
platform.
Right to seek compensation- The consumer has the right to seek or ask for redressal against unfair
and inhumane practices or exploitation of the consumer.
Consumer Responsibilities Responsibility to be aware - A consumer has to be careful of the safety
and quality of products and services before purchasing.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
10
Responsibility to think independently- Consumer should be well bothered about what they want and
need and hence make independent choices.
Responsibility to speak out- The buyer should be fearless to speak out their problems and tell to
traders what they exactly want Responsibility to complain- It becomes the consumer's responsibility
to express and file a complaint about their dissatisfaction with goods or services in a sincere and fair
manner.
Responsibility to be an Ethical Consumer- Consumer must be fair and not engage themselves with
any deceptive practice.
The Consumer Protection Act 1986 was enacted to provide for better protection of the interests of
consumers and for that purpose to make provision for the establishment of Consumers Councils and
other authorities for the settlement of consumers' disputes and for matters connected therewith
(Preamble).
The Act Inter alia, seeks to promote and protect the rights of consumers such as --
(1) right to be protected against marketing of goods which are hazardous to life and property;
(2) right to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity, standard and price of goods to
protect the consumer against unfair trade practices;
(3) right to be assured, wherever possible, access to variety of goods at competitive prices;
(4) right to be heard and to assured that customers' interests will receive due consideration at
appropriate forums.
(5) Right to seek redressal against unfair practices or unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and
(6) Right to consumer education The objects are sought to be promoted and protected by the
Consumer Protection Councils to be established at the Central and State levels.
The Act applies to all goods and services, except if otherwise provided by the Central Government by
Notification. To provide speedy and simple redressal of consumer disputes, a quasi judicial
machinery is set up at the District, State and Central levels. The three tier system of quasi judicial
bodies will observe the principle of natural justice and are empowered to give relief of a specific
nature and to award, wherever appropriate, compensation to consumers. Penalties for
non-compliance of the orders given by the quasi judicial bodies have also been provided.
Thus the Consumer Protection Act is to serve the interests of the consumers. Consumer education
and redressal of consumers' grievances are the two aspects of the Act. It makes good the loss a
consumer suffers and increases the feeling of responsibility of the manufacturer, trader, supplier or
businessman.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
11
The provisions of the Act have to be construed in favor of the consumer to achieve the purpose of
enactment as it is social benefit oriented legislation. The primary duty of the Court while construing
the provisions of such an Act is to adopt a constructive approach subject to that it should not do
violence to the language of the provisions and not contrary to attempted objective of the enactment.
Extent of Consumer Protection:
While other legislations may be either punitive or preventive, the Consumer
Protection Act compensates the consumer. The provisions of the Act are in addition
to and not in derogation of the provisions of any law at the time being in force (Sec
3). In Maine Container Services South Pvt Ltd v Go Garments 1998 (3) SCC 247 it has
been held that the Contract Act applies to all litigants before the Commissioner under
the Consumers Protection Act. Passengers traveling in train suffering injuries and
loss of Jewelry as a result of assault by unruly crowd are eligible for filing of
complaint before State Commission is maintainable notwithstanding the provisions
of sections 100 and 103 of Railways Act, 1889. The Consumer Protection Act
therefore gives the consumer an additional remedy besides those which may be
available under other existing laws. Existence of an arbitration clause in the
agreement is no bar to the entertainment of complaint by the Redressal Agency as the
remedy under the Act is in addition to the provisions of any other law. However, the
Consumer Forums under the Act have not taken over the jurisdiction of civil Courts.
If the dispute between the parties is pending in Civil Court no Consumer Forum will
adjudicate the dispute. Similarly if evidence be laid by the parties to the dispute is
voluminous or complicated the parties will be referred to the appropriate Civil Court.
Consumers Protection Act, thus enshrines the rights of a consumer to be informed
about the quality, quantity, potency, price etc., of the goods to be protected against
unfair trade practices, to seek inexpensive and expeditious redressal of grievances
before the Consumer Forums. Consumer Protection Act is a benevolent piece of
legislation to protect a large body of consumers from exploitation.
With the passage of time, the populace of the country is on hike and so are their
opinions. Their opinion forms the basis for their interpretation, it may be a good or a
bad interpretation. What would happen in the situation where people starting
interpreting the laws? We might be flooded with several interpretations. The
interpretations will be in such huge number that the laws will become unclear. This is
the reason why lawmakers, while making the law, formulate it in accordance with the
aim, set out by them, before penning down the legislations. The aim of any legislation
defines the basis of the act. It becomes the ground norm of the act, based upon which
the judiciary interprets the disputed texts.
The aim of any act forms the indispensable element, because it acts as the cord that
delivers the real intention of the legislators behind the act.  Whenever there is clash
between two legislations, it is the aim of the legislation which makes the judges to
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
12
derive at the endpoint in deciding which law has the superseding effect. It is through
the doctrine of pith and substance that judges are able to derive at the major
inclination towards one act over another act. This inclination is decided on the basis
of the aim/goal of the act and the facts of that particular case.
Somewhat similar situation aroused in front of Supreme Court in the case of Aftab
Singh and Others v. Emaar MGF Land Limited and Another ( Review Petition (C)
Nos. 2629-2630 of 2018 in Civil Appeal Nos. 23512-23513 of 2017)[1]. In this case the
Supreme Court cleared out the battle between arbitration and the statutory remedy
when it comes upon solving the consumer disputes, which also upheld the decision of
the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC). In this case, the
apex body for the consumer dispute in India (NCDRC) ruled in the favor of the
statutory remedy over the arbitration.
CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT (CPA) The beneficial legislation of Consumer
Protection Act aims at reducing the grievances of the all classes of customers by
providing them the preferential treatment. According to the Consumer Protection
Act, the consumer dispute is the entity where the consumer/ customers have been
given the convenient safeguards against ample exploitation like bad customer service,
faulty goods or any unfair trade practices. The interest of the customers is protected
by setting up, the three tier quasi-judicial consumer Redressal machinery which are
at national, state and district levels as per section 9 of Consumer Protection Act. The
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (CPA) has been enacted in light of certain concerns
related to public policy and the benefit of consumer. So it is clear that this act to is in
favour of the consumers and it has overriding effect on the arbitration act because
this act is not in derogation of any act but in addition of another act.
Thus it is clear that this act is not in derogation of any act but it is in addition to any
other active and it will prevail over the Arbitration Act.
Now in this case as promised by the opposite party that the delivery opposition shall
be handed over to the complainant shall on our before 31.10.2012. So we have taken
the cut of date as 01.11.2012 for the purpose of calculation regarding the reliefs
claimed by the complainant. The opposite party has stated that due to farmer's
unrest, Hon'ble High Court to stay order, provision of extraction of groundwater by
NGT et cetera et cetera, delayed the project and therefore the benefit should be given
to the opposite parties. As far as groundwater extraction is concerned it should have
been done by taking the prior permission of the concerned department and nobody
can extract under groundwater at its own. The opposite parties had full knowledge
regarding the acquisition of the land and the new that there might be farmer's
agitation and in spite of it the booked plots and flats. As stated by the opposite
parties, they paid enhanced compensation to the farmers/tenure holders in the light
of the judgement of Hon'ble High Court. So this was a routine order of the High
Court and if the proper payment has not been given to the landowner shall, the
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
13
Hon'ble High Court might come to the rescue.
The opposite party has stated that the construction/ development of the project has
already been completed and the opposite party has issued possession into letter to
the complainant and requested to make the balance sale consideration payable by the
complainants at the time of possession intimation and accordingly to obtained an OC
so that the finishing work and the completed. The complainant has his facts
specifically stated the opposite party had to pay Rs.5 37,500/- as damages due to
delay on the part so this amount should have been directed from the amount which
the complainant had to pay. But the opposite parties did not mention or adjust this
amount. So the opposite parties are at fault because if there is provision in the
agreement, he should have been paid to the complainant.
Now the next question arises as to the completion and occupancy certificate and also
NOCs of different departments such as Fire Department, Civil Aviation Department,
Pollution Control Department etc. the opposite party has stated that he has sent a
letter for taking possession but he did not mention about these certificates. First we
should know what are the completion certificate and occupancy certificate?
COMPLETION / OCCUPANCY  CERTIFICATE When buying a home, it is vital to
obtain documents, such as the Occupancy Certificate (OC) and Completion
Certificate (CC). These are essential documents that allow you to mortgage or sell
your home. Hence, homebuyers are advised to take possession of their flat or
property only after these documents have been issued.
According to Vikas Bhasin, CMD, Saya Group, "Completion Certificate and
Occupancy Certificate are some of the most important documents for a home buyer.
Civic authorities can evict the occupants in case of non-availability of the necessary
approvals. Before investing in a property, people must be doubly assured that all the
certificates and approvals are in place."
Let us dive a little deeper into the details of these documents and their importance
before you make a move to buy your dream home.
Owning a home is the culmination of years of savings, research, and paperwork. After
patiently waiting for the construction to be complete, you finally register the property
and take possession of your flat. But what if your dream home is declared
unauthorised, and you are evicted by the authorities? This is not as far-fetched as it
sounds. This nightmare could turn into reality without a crucial link in the property
sale process - the Occupancy Certificate (OC). 
The majority of apartments in different Indian cities have been occupied by owners
without any occupancy certificate. This oversight can turn into a costly mistake,
jeopardising the legal status of your dream home. The importance of the occupancy
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
14
certificate cannot be overstated as it seals the legal status of your property and
protects your ownership rights. 
Decoding legal documents  To understand the importance of an occupancy certificate
and other legal documents, let's decode the legal jargon and understand their
meaning in simple terms. Here's a ready reckoner of the most important legal
documents related to your property: 
Occupancy Certificate  An OC certifies that the construction of the building has
complied with the approved plans. It is issued by local municipal authorities or the
building proposal department once the building has been completed and is ready to
be occupied. Simply put, without an OC, your building has not been awarded a 'pass
certificate'. 
Completion Certificate  A Completion Certificate (CC) is issued only after the
construction meets other building standards like distance from the road, the height of
the building, and rainwater harvesting system. A CC alone cannot legalise
occupation; the OC is a must. 
Commencement Certificate  If you are buying an under construction property, make
sure you check the Commencement Certificate before signing the agreement. Many
builders do not wait for a Commencement Certificate. This is illegal and can create
serious problems in obtaining an OC at a subsequent stage. 
Why is it unsafe to buy a flat without OC? 
In the absence of a valid OC, the local municipal body can initiate serious action
against flat owners. In 2014, residents of a well-known building complex in Mumbai's
upscale Worli area were hit with a bolt from the blue after their complex was declared
unauthorised. At the time of possession, buyers overlooked the issuance of an OC
from the builder. It was only after that they were forced to evacuate their flats that
the writing on the wall became clear to them. 
This is just one instance, and if buyers are not careful about getting the OC, they may
face the following repercussions: 
• In the absence of a valid OC, your building can be demolished as it can be classified
as an unauthorised structure.
• The OC is crucial while applying for a home loan or loan to purchase a resale flat. If
you wish to sell or hypothecate the property after a lapse of time, you will not be able
to do so without a valid OC. 
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
15
• The water connection, sanitary connection or electricity supply can be disconnected
in the absence of an OC. 
How to obtain an OC  The OC is obtained from local municipal bodies by submitting
an OC application form along with the following documents: 
• Commencement Certificate  • Completion Certificate  • Built and Section plan  •
NOC for fire and pollution  • Area calculation sheet of floor signed by an authorised
architect  • Photographs of the completed building  • Tax assessment with tax paid
receipt  • Photographs of rain harvesting and solar panels  • Copy of the sanctioned
plan  After submitting the form, authorities inspect the complex and confirm if it has
conformed to the approved plan before issuing an OC. Legally and ideally, a builder
should submit an application with the municipal commissioner for the OC within 30
days of completion of the property. 
How you can apply for an OC  As a flat owner, you can also apply for an OC by
approaching the local corporation or municipality, and if all approvals are in place,
an OC is issued within 30 days of application. You will have to submit the same
documents as the builder to procure an OC. 
Know your rights  If the builder refuses to provide an OC, you should consider
exercising your legal rights. You can issue a notice against the builder asking him to
apply and hand over the copy of the OC within a month. You can also approach
consumer forums and file a writ petition demanding the OC. 
Some canny builders simply present the receipt of the OC and dupe gullible
customers. But you shouldn't accept anything less than the actual OC as the receipt
may be dated. 
Landmark legislations like the Real Estate Regulatory Act (RERA) have been passed
to regulate the sector, promote transparency and protect consumer rights. However,
consumers must be vigilant and understand their rights and responsibilities towards
owning a property. Documents like OC are essential and ensure the security of your
investment. 
Going forward, real estate experts believe that the OC should be made mandatory for
the registration of flats and essential services. Until then, buyers must ensure
builders get all the necessary approvals before handing over a property. ‚‚
A Completion Certificate (CC) is an important legal document that certifies that a
building is constructed according to the laid down norms and master plan of the city.
This document has all the information related to the project, such as the building
materials used, building height, and building plan, among other things like provision
for green belt.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
16
In a nutshell, this document certifies that the building adheres to all the prevailing
rules and has not violated any norms. In fact, this document is to be shown
compulsorily to the authorities to obtain electricity and water connection.
Builders are allowed to obtain a provisional Completion Certificate when there are
minor works left in the project. Authorities then provide a provisional certificate valid
for six months. After the expiry of the six months, the developer is bound to get a
final CC.
Who issues a Completion Certificate?
Local authorities issue the Completion Certificate after a thorough inspection of the
premises. If the developer violates no rules, authority issues a Completion Certificate.
Why is Completion Certificate important?
Buyers must be aware of the fact that if they are buying or moving into a property
that does not have a Completion Certificate, they might be making a risky investment
choice. The civic authorities hold the power to slap heavy penalties on the developer,
leading to stalling or cancellation of the registered layout of the project. In case the
building is already occupied, residents may also have to face eviction in extreme
cases.
Difference between Occupancy Certificate and Completion Certificate Occupancy
Certificate examines and certifies a property for adherence to bye-laws, civic
amenities, electricity, sanitation and other clearances. On the other hand, a
Completion Certificate is a document that certifies that a property is fit for possession
by the buyers.
Clarifying the difference, Deepak Kapoor, Director, Gulshan Homz, says,
"Completion Certificate is just a reaffirmation that the building has been constructed
as per the building byelaws and the layout plan has been approved by various
concerned authorities. Occupation Certificate signals that there is no violation of
building construction norms, and thus, the structure is safe for occupants. 
Generally, these documents are not required at the time of registry, and hence,
buyers tend to overlook or ignore these. But for their own benefit and peace of mind,
it is warranted that buyers of both ready-to-move-in as well as under-construction
properties check these documents before taking possession. This would help avoid
any unnecessary dispute or confrontation in the future.
Hon'ble Supreme Court on occupancy certificate by the builders.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
17
Supreme Court: The bench of Dr. DY Chandrachud* and AS Bopanna, JJ has held
that failure on the part of the builder to provide occupancy certificate is a continuing
breach under the Maharashtra Ownership Flats (Regulation of the Promotion of
Construction, Sale, Management and Transfer) Act 1963 and amounts to a continuing
wrong.
Factual Background The appellant is a co-operative housing society. The respondent
constructed Wings 'A' and 'B' and entered into agreements to sell flats with individual
purchasers in accordance with the Maharashtra Ownership Flats (Regulation of the
Promotion of Construction, Sale, Management and Transfer) Act 1963 (MOFA). The
members of the appellant booked the flats in 1993 and were granted possession in
1997. According to the appellant, the respondent failed to take steps to obtain the
occupation certificate from the municipal authorities.
There was an obligation on the respondent to provide the occupancy certificate and
pay for the relevant charges till the certificate has been provided, however, the
respondent time and again failed to provide the occupancy certificate to the appellant
society. For this reason, a complaint was instituted in 1998 by the appellant against
the respondent. The NCDRC on 20 August 2014 directed the respondent to obtain
the certificate within a period of four months. Further, the NCDRC also imposed a
penalty for any the delay in obtaining the occupancy certificate beyond these 4
months. Since 2014 till date, the respondent failed to provide the occupancy
certificate.
In the absence of the occupation certificate, individual flat owners were not eligible
for electricity and water connections. Due to the efforts of the appellant, temporary
water and electricity connections were granted by the authorities. However, the
members of the appellant had to pay property tax at a rate 25% higher than the
normal rate and water charges at a rate which was 50% higher than the normal
charge.
Analysis Obligations of Promoter under MOFA Section 3 of the MOFA imposes
certain general obligations on a promoter. These obligations inter alia include
making disclosures on the nature of title to the land, encumbrances on the land,
fixtures, fittings and amenities to be provided, and to not grant possession of a flat
until a completion certificate is given by the local authority. The responsibility to
obtain the occupancy certificate from the local authority has also been imposed under
the agreement to sell between the members of the appellant and the respondent on
the latter.
Sections 3 and 6 of the MOFA indicate that the promoter has an obligation to provide
the occupancy certificate to the flat owners. Apart from this, the promoter must make
payments of outgoings such as ground rent, municipal taxes, water charges and
electricity charges till the time the property is transferred to the flat-owners. Where
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
18
the promoter fails to pay such charges, the promoter is liable even after the transfer
of property.
Limitation In the instant case, the appellant submitted that since the cause of action
is founded on a continuing wrong, the complaint is within limitation.
Section 24A of the Consumer Protection Act 1986 provides for the period of
limitation period for lodging a complaint. A complaint to a consumer forum has to be
filed within two years of the date on which the cause of action has arisen.
Section 22 of the Limitation Act 1963 provides for the computation of limitation in
the case of a continuing breach of contract or tort. It provides that in case of a
continuing breach of contract, a fresh period of limitation begins to run at every
moment of time during which the breach continues A continuing wrong occurs when
a party continuously breaches an obligation imposed by law or agreement. The
continuous failure to obtain an occupancy certificate is a breach of the obligations
imposed on the respondent under the MOFA and amounts to a continuing wrong.
The appellants, therefore, were entitled to damages arising out of this continuing
wrong and their complaint is not barred by limitation.
"Rejecting the complaint as being barred by limitation, when the demand for higher
taxes is made repeatedly due to the lack of an occupancy certificate, is a narrow view
which is not consonance with the welfare objective of the Consumer Protection Act
1986."
Consumer Section 2(1)(d) of the Consumer Protection Act defines a 'consumer' as a
person that avails of any service for a consideration. A 'deficiency' is defined under
Section 2(1)(g) as the shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality of service that is
required to be maintained by law.
In the present case, the NCDRC had held that the appellant is not a 'consumer' under
the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act as they have claimed the recovery of
higher charges paid to the municipal authorities from the respondent. Extending this
further, the NCDRC observed that the respondent is not the service provider for
water or electricity and thus, the complaint is not maintainable.
The respondent was responsible for transferring the title to the flats to the society
along with the occupancy certificate. The failure of the respondent to obtain the
occupation certificate is a deficiency in service for which the respondent is liable.
Thus, the members of the appellant society are well within their rights as 'consumers'
to pray for compensation as a recompense for the consequent liability (such as
payment of higher taxes and water charges by the owners) arising from the lack of an
occupancy certificate.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
19
[Samruddhi Co-operative Housing Society Ltd v. Mumbai Mahalaxmi Construction
Pvt. Ltd, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 35, decided on 11.01.2022] The opposite parties have
stated that the construction of the project has already been completed and the
opposite party has issued possession intimation letter to the complainants are and
requested to make the balance sale consideration payable by the complainants at the
time of possession intimation and accordingly to obtain NOC so that the finishing
work can be completed. Before giving possession, there should be completion
certificate and occupancy certificate. In absence of the occupancy certificate, delivery
of possession is no possession in the eye of law. The opposite parties have not filed
the copy of the completion certificate or occupancy certificate. During argument
nothing has been revealed in this respect as to whether completion certificate has
been issued by the concerned government authority or not. So it will be presumed
that there is neither completion certificate nor occupancy certificate issued by the
competent authority. Possession has not been given to the complainants therefore the
opposite parties are liable to pay compensation and damages as per the different case
laws of Hon'ble Supreme Court and Hon'ble NCDRC.
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in Ghaziabad Development Authority  Vs. Balbir
Singh (2004) 4 SCC 65-"The Supreme Court, at the outset, reiterated the position
taken in the case of Lucknow Development Authority v. M.K. Gupta, and held that
"the Consumer Protection Act has a wide reach and the Commission has jurisdiction
even in cases of service rendered by statutory and public authorities". It further held
that the power of the NCDRC extends to awarding compensation to consumers for
misfeasance in the public office i.e. an act which is oppressive or capricious or
arbitrary or negligent provided loss or injury is suffered by a citizen. Therefore, it
upheld the appeals filed before it to the extent that it confirmed the jurisdiction of the
NCDRC to award compensation in cases of service rendered by statutory & public
authorities (the land development authorities in the present case).
As to the issue of whether the grant of interest at the rate of 18% per annum by the
NCDRC in all cases is justifiable, the Supreme Court held in the negative. It stated
that "the power to and duty to award compensation does not mean that irrespective
of facts of the case compensation can be awarded in all matters at a uniform rate of
18% per annum." It held it to be unsustainable. The Court further stated that the
"Award of compensation must be under different separate heads and must vary from
case to case depending on the facts of each case." The purpose of awarding
compensation is to recompense for a loss or injury suffered and such compensation
would therefore be proportional to the amount of loss and injury.
While considering the compensation to be awarded to the consumers in cases of
deficiency of service by Development Authorities, the Court laid down a range of
principles for the determination of the amount of compensation, summarised below:
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
20
To award compensation, the Forum or the Commission must determine that service
has been deficient and/or misfeasance in public office which has resulted in loss or
injury. While no hard and fast rule can be laid down, the Court gave a few instances
where the award of compensation would be justifiable, including where possession is
not handed over within the intimated period even though allotment is made and the
price is paid. In such cases, the loss could be determined based on loss of rent which
could have been earned if possession was given. Compensation could also be the
scheme has been canceled without any justifiable cause, after the allotment.
  Compensation cannot be uniform and to illustrate this, the Court lays down the
principle to be followed for the determination of compensation in two cases-  (a)
where the delivery of possession is being directed, and (b) where only the monies are
directed to be returned or refunded by the Court. In case (a), the compensation for
harassment will necessarily have to be less since in a way the aggrieved party is being
compensated by an increase in the value of the property he is getting. In case (b)
however, the party is suffering a greater loss since he has been deprived of the
flat/plot, and his expectation of delivery of possession. He would also be denied the
benefit of an increase in the value of land and the compensation thereof. Therefore,
the compensation to be awarded in such cases would have to be higher than in case
(a).
The Court held that "such compensation has to be worked out after looking into the
facts of each case and after determining what is the amount of harassment/loss which
has been caused to the consumer."
Compensation would include compensation for physical, mental, or even emotional
suffering, insult, or injury or loss."
"The consumer protection laws have a wide reach and the consumers are entitled to
receive compensation for deficiency in services rendered by statutory and public
authorities. The Consumer Commissions have been vested with the jurisdiction to
award the value of goods or services and compensation. On being satisfied that a
complainant is entitled to compensation for loss or injury or harassment or mental
agony or oppression, it must direct the authority to pay compensation. A wide
discretion has been given to determine the quantum of compensation for any loss or
damage suffered by a consumer, to redress any injustice. However, it is a
well-established principle that the computation of compensation has to be fair,
reasonable, and must reconcile with the loss or injury suffered. The Consumer Forum
is cast with the duty to take into account all relevant factors for arriving at the
compensation to be paid.
This landmark decision has set a precedent on the matter of compensation to be
awarded in matters relating to allotment of land by development authorities and has
been relied upon in many subsequent cases of the Supreme Court. In the case of H. P.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
21
Housing Board v. Varinder Kumar Garg[(2005) 9 SCC 430] and Haryana Urban
Development Authority vs. Darsh Kumar[(2005) 9 SCC 449], the Supreme Court
directed the Commission to follow the principles laid down in the case of Ghaziabad
Development Authority vs. Balbir Singh in future cases."
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Haryana Urban Development ..... vs. Darsh
Kumar, Etc., Civil Appeal no 5796 of 2002 decided on 28 July, 2004 has held ;
"This Court has, in the case of Ghaziabad Development Authority vs. Balbir
Singh reported in (2004) 5 SCC 65, deprecated this practice. This Court has held that
interest at the rate of 18% cannot be granted in all cases irrespective of the facts of the
c a s e .  T h i s  C o u r t  h a s  h e l d  t h a t  t h e  C o n s u m e r  F o r u m s  c o u l d  g r a n t
damages/compensation for mental agony/harassment where it finds misfeasance in
public office. This Court has held that such compensation is a recompense for the loss
or injury and it necessarily has to be based on a finding of loss or injury and must
co-relate with the amount of loss or injury. This Court has held that the Forum or the
Commission thus had to determine that there was deficiency in service and/or
misfeasance in public office and that it has resulted in loss or injury. This Court has
also laid down certain other guidelines which the Forum or the Commission has to
follow in future cases.
We are informed that in spite of there being no stay, to payment of interest beyond
12% and in spite of clarification given by this Court's order (reported in (2004) 5 SCC
65), the amounts have still not been paid. We feel that for the lapse Appellants must
pay interest at the rate of 15% from 17th March, 2004 till payment. Appellants shall
also pay costs fixed at Rs.500/- in each case to the Legal Aid Society of the Supreme
Court. The Appellants must recover the amount paid towards costs personally from
the officer/s, who were responsible for not paying even after clarification by this
Court. We clarify that this Order shall not be taken as a precedent in any other matter
as the order has been passed taking special features of the case into account. The
Forum/Commission will follow the principles laid down by this Court in the case
of Ghaziabad Development Authority vs. Balbir Singh (supra) in future cases. The
Appeals are disposed off in above terms. There will be no order as to costs."
So it is clear that the compensation and rate of interest shall depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case and no hard and fast rule can be framed. In this
connection some of the judgment of the Supreme Court and Hon'ble NCDRC should
be taken into account.
In  the  case  of   PRIYANKA MITTAL & ANR. V. PARSVNATH DEVELOPERS LTD.
& ANR. (NCDRC).These appeals arise out of single order of State Commission, hence,
decided by common order. These appeals have been filed against the order dated
25.2.2015 in Complaint Nos. 18 of 2013- Nalin Bhargava & Anr. Vs. Parsvnath
Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 34 of 2013- Jasleen Viswanathan & Anr. Vs. Parsvnath
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
22
Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 58 of 2011- Janmejai Mani Tiwari Vs. Parsvnath Developers
Ltd. & Anr.; 68 of 2013- Indu Singh Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 69 of
2013- Poonam Sagar Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 86 of 2010- Priyanka
Mittal & Anr. Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 101 of 2011- Mohd. Aslam Khan
& Anr. Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 130 of 2012- Dr. Sunil Kr. Singh & Anr.
Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 49 of 2012- Neera Mittal & Anr. Vs. Parsvnath
Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 74 of 2011- Deepak Bhalla Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. &
Anr.; 87 of 2010- Syed Gufran Ali Alvi & Anr. Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr.;
96 of 2011- Uppasana Malik Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 175 of
20130- Umesh Chandra Dixit & Anr. Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr.; 97 of
2011- Pravin Kumar Goel & Anr. Vs. Parsvnath Developers Ltd. & Anr. which
complaints were partly allowed.
          The  Hon'ble  NCDRC  held that:
"Brief facts of the cases are that opposite parties/respondents are engaged in the
activity of housing construction and accordingly they have launched a project named
as Parsvnath Planet situated in Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. The project was
demonstrated to be very lucrative and made attractive to the vendees, in order to
procure/collect money from the needy persons demonstrating themselves to be
excellence in the field of construction activity as compared to other builders and
assured the buyers/complainants that it has been duly approved by the Lucknow
Development Authority and necessary permission has also been obtained from them.
The emphasis was made by the opposite parties that the possession of the Unit shall
be given within a scheduled period of 36+6=42 months stipulated in agreements
executed in between the parties for the project launched in the year 2006. The
complainants/appellants attracted by the promise and assurance of the opposite
parties, somehow managed and arranged the money from their personal sources as
well as on loan at attractive rate of interest and the hard earned money was paid by
them to the opposite parties in a hope that the possession of the units shall be
provided to them in the year 2009 and they can leave peacefully in their own houses,
since the complainants are living in rented houses. 
The complainants visited the construction site of the opposite parties after depositing
the entire amount, where it was revealed that the construction activities were on halt
and the persons available on the site told the complainants that the apartments are
likely to be completed till 2015. Even the partial construction done by the opposite
parties was defective and did not match the specifications provided in the agreement.
The complainants were shocked on hearing it and observing the site. The
complainants immediately contacted the Area Manager, who told the complainants
that there is some delay in the construction of the apartment and the apartments
shall be ready till June, 2010. The complainants have to repay the amount taken on
loan alongwith interest without getting the possession of the allotted units causing
irreparable loss and injury to them. The complainants have come to know that the
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
23
opposite parties have invested the funds earmarked for this project into their other
projects in other city due to which they have not been able to complete the project in
time. Besides this, it has also come to the light that although the opposite parties had
collected huge funds from the buyers but in spite of that the opposite parties have
miserably failed to pay the dues of Lucknow Development Authority which forced the
Lucknow Development Authority to issue coercive measures against the opposite
parties for the recovery of their dues. Alleging deficiency on the part of opposite
parties/ respondents, complainants filed separate complaints before State
Commission. Aggrieved  by  the  order  of  Hon'ble  State  Commission, these  appeals
preferred  before Hon'ble National  Consumer  Disputes  Redressal  Commission.
Hon'ble  NCDRC discussed various  case  laws  and  after  hearing  the  parties held,
"Learned Counsel for appellants submitted that as complainants have been deprived
of possession for a long period beyond agreed period, it amounts to restrictive trade
practice under Section 2 (nnn) of Consumer Protection Act and complainants are
entitled to get compensation. Section 2 (nnn) runs as under:- means a trade practice
which tends to bring about restrictive trade practice manipulation of price or its
conditions of delivery or to affect flow of supplies in the market relating to goods or
services in such a manner as to impose on the consumers unjustified costs or
restrictions and shall include- Delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader in
supply of such goods or in providing the services which has led or is likely to lead to
rise in the price; Any trade practice which requires a consumer to buy, hire or avail of
any goods, or, as the case may be, services as condition precedent to buying, hiring or
availing of other goods or services; Perusal of aforesaid provision reveals that when
opposite party delays in delivery of goods which leads to rise in the price of goods
meaning thereby, more price is charged from complainant, it amounts to restrictive
trade practice. In the case in hand, opposite party on account of delayed delivery of
possession is not charging higher rate than the agreed rate for delivery of possession
of flat, so, it does not fall within the purview of restrictive trade practice
under Section 2(nnn) of Consumer Protection Act."
"Admittedly, agreements were executed in 2006 and as per agreements, possession of
flats was to be delivered within 42 months, meaning thereby, possession was to be
given in the year 2009-2010 and possession has not been handed over so far though
year 2016 has started. No doubt, complainants are entitled to get penalty amount for
delayed delivery of possession as per clause 10(c) of the agreement but opposite party
cannot be permitted to avail benefit of aforesaid clause for indefinite period. This
penalty clause should be allowed for the benefit of parties for a limited period and in
the cases in hand, I deem it appropriate to extend applicability of aforesaid clause for
a period of one year beyond 42 months and after that, complainants are certainly
entitled to compensation. Opposite party cannot be allowed to avail huge funds of
complainants by paying merely Rs. 5/- per sq. ft. for example, complainants who
have purchased flat measuring 164.901 sq. mtr., they have made payment of about
Rs. 31.00 to 32 lakhs and in the garb of clause 10 (c), opposite party is paying penalty
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
24
@ approximately Rs. 9,000/- per month against enjoying funds more than Rs. 30.00
lakhs. As complainants have been deprived to shift to their flats for a long period
which would not only have given them satisfaction of living in their own house but
also have raised their social status and opposite party has enjoyed funds of
complainants for a long period, I deem it appropriate to allow compensation @ Rs.
15,000/- p.m. to the complainants who have applied for flats upto 175 sq. mtr and Rs.
20,000/- per month to complainants who have applied for flats above 175 sq. after 54
months of execution of agreement till delivery of possession."
Against this judgment, parties went to Hon'ble  Supreme  Court. The judgment of
Hon'ble  Supreme  Court is:- 
In  Nalin Bhargava  vs.  Parsvnath Developers Ltd. CA 6662/2018 @ SLP(C)
7596/2016 etc and other related civil appeals on 13 July, 2018, Hon'ble Supreme
Court held:-
          "Leave granted in all the special leave petitions.CA 6662/2018 @ SLP(C)
7596/2016 etc.             It is submitted by Mr. M.L. Lahoty, learned counsel appearing
for the appellants in all the appeals that the possession has been handed over and the
deficiencies have been removed and, therefore, he has no grievance. However, Mr.
Lahoty would insist that there should be imposition  of  costs as compensation.
            Mr. Sachin Datta, learned senior counsel appearing for the developer has
raised   objections    with regard to imposition of costs.
            Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we are of the considered opinion
that the cause of justice would be best subserved if each of the appellants in the
present appeals are given Rs.1,50,000/- (Rupees one lakh fifty thousand only) per
flat, towards costs. When we say "cost", we mean costs alone and nothing else."
In the case of Meerut Development Authority Vs. Suresh Chandra Garg, Special
Leave to Appeal (C) No(s). 24059/2022, Judgment dated 05.01.2023 Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held, "consequently, the present petition is disposed of with a
direction, to sum up of the litigation which is pending for a long time. Let the order of
the District Consumer Commission 06.09.2019 shall be complied with and the
respondent be refunded the entire deposited amount with simple interest at the rate
of 12% per annum within a further period of 60 days from today failing which it shall
carry interest at the rate of 15% per annum until actual payment."
Therefore it is clear that the amount shall be refunded with simple interest at the rate
of 12% within 60 days from the date of judgment otherwise the rate of interest shall
be 15% simple interest per annum till the date of actual payment. In this case we take
the cut-off date as October 2014 , and the interest shall be computed from November
1, 2014 till the date of actual payment.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
25
            These builders are just earning money from the consumers to whom they
issued allotment letters and got a huge amount. They keep this amount for a long
time and earn interest on it. Property dealing is that part of business where they
never pay a penny to the consumers on their amounts deposited for a long-term or if
they pay, they pay a meagre interest of about 5% or so but they charge 18 to 24% or
more if the consumers default in depositing any instalment. It reminds us the story of
"The Merchant of Venice" The Merchant of Venice is the story of a Jewish money
lender Shylock who demands that an antisemitic Christian offer "a pound of flesh" as
collateral against a loan. These acts of builders also remind us the age of  Sahukari
during ancient India and also during British Raj. Whether these builders have power
to frame their own law? They put their terms and conditions in such a way that the
sufferer will always be the consumer. The Consumer Protection Act 1986 has been
enacted for the benefits of consumers,  so the courts dealing with Consumer
Protection Act 1986 should come forward for their rescue. The courts are not
governed by the builders but they are governed by the law, Custom and Usages. Now
in the background of all the facts and also the facts of the present case, we will also
discuss something more. We should also see the objects of the Consumer Protection
Act 1986.
Now in the present case, copies of completion certificate or occupancy certificate has
not been filed. There is no of NOCs of various departments as required under the law.
So in the circumstances we are of the opinion that the complainants are entitled for
the following reliefs with interest as mentioned in the above mentioned judgment of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The opposite parties cannot cancel the allotment when
they are at fault and they have not obtained the completion and occupancy certificate
from the concerned authorities.
The complainants are entitled to get the possession of the unit no A-1304, floor 13th,
type II BHK (1075), Super Area-1075 square ft in "Amprapali Castle" Tower/Block-A,
within 60 days from the date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the
opposite parties shall jointly and severally shall liable to pay Rs.50,000.00 per month
with interest at a rate of 12 percent from 01.11.2012 if paid within 60 days from the
date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the rate of interest shall be 15% per
annum from01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual possession and registration of sale
deed of the said unit along with copy of completion certificate, occupancy certificate
and NOCs of various departments as discussed above.
The complainants are entitled to get interest at a rate of 12% per annum from the
opposite parties, jointly and severally, on the amount deposited by him from their
respective date of deposits if paid within 60 days from the date of judgment of this
complaint case otherwise the rate of interest shall be 15% per annum on the amount
deposited by complainant from their respective date of deposits till the date of actual
delivery of possession of the said unit and registration of sale deed along with
certificates as mentioned above.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
26
The complainants are entitled to get Rs.537,500/- from the opposite parties, jointly
and severally towards delay charges with interest at a rate of 12% from 01.11.2012 if
paid within 60 days from the date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the
rate of interest shall be 15% per annum from01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual
possession and registration of sale deed of the said unit along with copy of
completion certificate , occupancy certificate and NOCs of various departments as
discussed above.
The complainants are entitled to get Rs.550,000/- from the opposite parties, jointly
and severally, towards cost of the case with interest at a rate of 12% from 01.11.2012 if
paid within 60 days from the date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the
rate of interest shall be 15% per annum from01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual
possession and registration of sale deed of the said unit along with copy of
completion certificate, occupancy certificate and NOCs of various departments as
discussed above.
The complainants are entitled to get Rs.5,00,000/- from the opposite parties, jointly
and severally, towards gross unfair trade practice and deficiency in services with
interest at a rate of 12% from 01.11.2012 if paid within 60 days from the date of
judgment of this complaint case otherwise the rate of interest shall be 15% per annum
from01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual possession and registration of sale deed of
the said unit along with copy of completion certificate , occupancy certificate and
NOCs of various departments as discussed above.
As far as the relief clause of the complaint case regarding "any other relief deemed fit
and appropriate under the facts and circumstances of the case may also be awarded
to the complainant against the opposite party", the complainants are entitled to get
Rs.20 lakhs from the opposite parties jointly and severally towards mental agony,
harassment, depression with interest at a rate of 12% from 01.11.2012 if paid within
60 days from the date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the rate of
interest shall be 15% per annum from 01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual possession
and registration of sale deed of the said unit along with copy of completion certificate,
occupancy certificate and NOCs of various departments as discussed above.
The complaint case is decided accordingly.
ORDER 1-      The opposite parties are directed to hand over the possession of the
unit no A-1304, floor 13th, type II BHK (1075), Super Area-1075 square ft in
"Amprapali Castle" Tower/Block-A, within 60 days from the date of judgment of this
complaint case otherwise the opposite parties shall jointly and severally shall liable to
pay Rs.50,000.00 per month with interest at a rate of 12% percent from 01.11.2012 if
paid within 60 days from the date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the
rate of interest shall be 15% per annum from 01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual
possession and registration of sale deed of the said unit along with copy of
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
27
completion certificate, occupancy certificate and NOCs of various departments as
discussed above.
2-      The opposite parties are directed to pay interest at a rate of 12% per annum,
jointly and severally, on the amount deposited by him from their respective date of
deposits if paid within 60 days from the date of judgment of this complaint case
otherwise the rate of interest shall be 15% per annum on the amount deposited by
complainant from their respective date of deposits till the date of actual delivery of
possession of the said unit and registration of sale deed along with certificates as
mentioned above.
3-      The opposite parties are directed to pay Rs.537,500/-, jointly and severally
towards delay charges with interest at a rate of 12% from 01.11.2012 if paid within 60
days from the date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the rate of interest
shall be 15% per annum from 01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual possession and
registration of sale deed of the said unit along with copy of completion certificate,
occupancy certificate and NOCs of various departments as discussed above.
4-      The opposite parties are directed to pay Rs.550,000/-, jointly and severally,
towards cost of the case with interest at a rate of 12% from 01.11.2012 if paid within
60 days from the date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the rate of
interest shall be 15% per annum from 01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual possession
and registration of sale deed of the said unit along with copy of completion certificate,
occupancy certificate and NOCs of various departments as discussed above.
5-      The opposite parties are directed to pay Rs.5,00,000/-, jointly and severally,
towards gross unfair trade practice and deficiency in services with interest at a rate of
12% from 01.11.2012 if paid within 60 days from the date of judgment of this
complaint case otherwise the rate of interest shall be 15% per annum from 01.11.2012
till the delivery of actual possession and registration of sale deed of the said unit
along with copy of completion certificate, occupancy certificate and NOCs of various
departments as discussed above.
6-      As far as the relief clause of the complaint case regarding "any other relief
deemed fit and appropriate under the facts and circumstances of the case may also be
awarded to the complainant against the opposite party", the opposite parties are
directed to pay Rs.20 lakhs jointly and severally towards mental agony, harassment,
depression with interest at a rate of 12% from 01.11.2012 if paid within 60 days from
the date of judgment of this complaint case otherwise the rate of interest shall be 15%
per annum from 01.11.2012 till the delivery of actual possession and registration of
sale deed of the said unit along with copy of completion certificate, occupancy
certificate and NOCs of various departments as discussed above.
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
28
            All the decreetal amount shall be paid within 60 days from the date of
judgment of this complaint case, the complainant shall be entitled to present
Execution proceedings before this court at the cost of the opposite parties.
            The stenographer is requested to upload this order on the Website of this
Commission today itself.
            Certified copy of this judgment be provided to the parties as per rules.   
   
        (Sushil Kumar)                            (Rajendra Singh) 
              Member                                  Presiding Member
Judgment dated/typed signed by us and pronounced in the open court.
Consign to the Record-room.
 
         (Sushil Kumar)                            (Rajendra Singh) 
              Member                                  Presiding Member
Dated  26.04.2013
JafRi, PA I
C-2
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
29
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              [HON'BLE MR. Rajendra Singh]  PRESIDING MEMBER 
        [HON'BLE MR. SUSHIL KUMAR]  JUDICIAL MEMBER 
   
Sadanand Chaudhary vs Amrapali Castel , Amrapali Group on 22 March, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24567853/
30
