U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13
September, 2022
         Cause Title/Judgement-Entry                   STATE CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL
 Reserved
State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
U.P. Lucknow.
Appeal  No.3415 of  2017
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd.,
Branch, Kerakat, Distt. Jaunpur through its
Branch Manager.                                                 ...Appellant.           
                                       Versus
Sudama Mishra s/o Late Mahanand Mishra,
R/o Village, Deorai, presently R/o Veerbhanupur,
Post, Chandwak, Distt. Jaunpur.                      ...Respondent.
Present:-
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
1
1- Hon'ble Sri Rajendra  Singh, Presiding Member.
2- Hon'ble Sri Vikas  Saxena, Member.
Sri Hemraj Mishra, Advocate for the appellant.
None for the respondent.
Date   28.09.2022
 JUDGMENT
Per Mr. Rajendra Singh, Member: This Appeal has been filed by the appellant under Section 15 of
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 against the judgment and order dated 4.10.2017 passed by Ld.
District Forum, Jaunpur in Complaint case no.113 of 2016, Sudama Mishra vs. U.P. Sahkari Gram
Vikas Bank Ltd.
This appeal has been filed with a delay and an application for condonation of delay supported with
affidavit has been given by the appellant.  
We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant Mr. Hemraj Mishra. None appeared for the
respondent. We have perused the pleadings evidence and application for condonation of delay.
The appellant has stated in his affidavit that the impugned judgment dated 4.10.2017 was passed by
the ld.
 
District Forum, Jaunpur and he got certified copy on 5.10.2017. It is also stated that the delay in
filing the appeal has been occurred due to departmental procedure and formalities due to which
some delay had taken place in filing the instant appeal.
We have perused the judgment which is delivered on 4.10.2017. Both parties were present before the
ld. District Forum and the appellant applied for copy on 4.10.2017 and the certified copy was
received by the appellant on 5.10.2017 but the appeal has been filed  on 27.12.2017 i.e. after about 52
days. Thus, is it clear that there is delay of about 52 days in filing the present appeal. 
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
2
Now before going to the time limit and effect of delay in filing appeal, it is better to understand the
object of The Consumer Protection Act.  
The Consumer Protection Act 1986 was enacted to provide for better protection of the interests of
consumers and for that purpose to make provision for the establishment of Consumers Councils and
other authorities for the settlement of consumers' disputes and for matters connected therewith
(Preamble).
The Act Inter alia, seeks to promote and protect the rights of consumers such as -
 right to be protected against marketing of goods which are hazardous to life and property;
right to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity, standard and price of goods to
protect the consumer against unfair trade practices;
   
right to be assured, wherever possible, access to variety of goods at competitive prices;
right to be heard and to assured that customers' interests will receive due consideration at
appropriate forums.
Right to seek redressal against unfair practices or unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and    
 (6)    Right to consumer education The objects are sought to be promoted and protected by the
Consumer Protection Councils to be established at the Central and State levels.
The Act applies to all goods and services, except if otherwise provided by the Central Government by
Notification. To provide speedy and simple redressal of consumer disputes, a quasi judicial
machinery is set up at the District, State and Central levels. The three tier system of quasi judicial
bodies will observe the principle of natural  justice and are empowered to give relief of a specific
nature and to award, wherever appropriate, compensation to  consumers. Penalties for
non-compliance of the orders given by the quasi judicial bodies have also been provided.
Thus the Consumer Protection Act is to serve the interests of the consumers. Consumer education
and redressal of consumers' grievances are the two aspects of the Act. It makes good the loss a
consumer suffers and increases the feeling of responsibility of the manufacturer, trader, supplier or
businessman.
The provisions of the Act have to be construed in favor of the consumer to achieve the purpose of
enactment as it is social benefit oriented legislation. The primary duty of the Court while construing
the provisions of such an Act is to adopt a constructive approach subject to that it should not do
violence to the language of the provisions and not contrary to attempted objective of the enactment.
Extent of Consumer Protection:
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
3
While other legislations may be either punitive or preventive, the Consumer
Protection Act compensates the consumer. The provisions of the Act are in addition
to and not in derogation of the provisions of any law at the time being in force (Sec
3). In Maine Container Services South Pvt. Ltd. v. Go Garments 1998 (3) SCC 247 it
has been held that the Contract Act applies to all litigants before the Commissioner
under the Consumers Protection Act. Passengers traveling in train suffering injuries
and loss of Jewelry as a result of assault by unruly crowd are eligible for filing of
complaint before State Commission is maintainable notwithstanding the provisions
of sections 100 and 103 of Railways Act, 1889. The Consumer Protection Act
therefore gives the consumer an additional remedy besides those which may be
available under other existing laws. Existence of an arbitration clause in the
agreement is no bar to the entertainment of complaint by the Redressal Agency as the
remedy under the Act is in addition to the provisions of any other law. However, the
Consumer Forums under the Act have not taken over the jurisdiction of civil Courts.
If the dispute between the parties is pending in Civil Court no Consumer Forum will
adjudicate the dispute. Similarly if evidence be laid by the parties to the dispute is
voluminous or complicated the parties will be referred to the appropriate Civil Court.
Consumers Protection Act, thus enshrines the rights of a consumer to be informed
about the quality, quantity, potency, price etc., of the goods to be protected against
unfair trade practices, to seek inexpensive and expeditious redressal of grievances
before the Consumer Forums. Consumer Protection Act is a benevolent piece of
legislation to protect a large body of consumers from exploitation.
          We have to see the provisions regarding filing of complaint and appeal. Section
24 (A) of the act says  ["24-A. Limitation period- (1) The District Forum, the State
Commission or the National Commission shall not admit a complaint unless it is filed
within two years from the date on which the cause of action has arisen.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a complaint may be
entertained after the period specified in sub-section (1), if the complainant satisfies
the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case
may be, that he had sufficient cause for not filing the complaint within such period;
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the National Commission, the State
Commission or the District Forum, as the case may be, records its reasons for condoning such delay]
  From perusal of the aforesaid section, it transpires that the period of limitation is two years from
the date on which the cause of action arose.
Regarding filing of appeal section 15 of the Consumer Protection Act says         "15. Appeal -Any
person aggrieved by an order made by the District Forum may prefer an appeal against such order to
the State Commission within a period of thirty            days from the date of the order, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed:
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
4
Provided that the State Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
finding it within that period.
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the District Forum, shall be entertained by the State Commission
unless the appellant has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that
amount or twenty-five thousand rupees, whichever is less: "
We have also to see the following judicial pronouncement regarding delay.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India was pleased to hold in Civil Appeal No.2067 of
2002, State Bank of India vs. M/s B.S. Agricultural dated 20.3.2009 at paras 15 and
16 that:
"On its plain averments, the complaint is barred by time and ought to have been
dismissed as such but curiously this aspect was not examined by any of the consumer
fora although specific plea to this effect was taken by the Bank.
          Since the complaint is barred by time and liable to be dismissed on that count, it
would be unnecessary to examine the other grounds of challenge." 
 
          Considering the totality of the circumstances and view of the provisions contained under
Section 24(A) of the C.P. Act and the ruling laiddown by the Hon'ble Apex Court in State Bank of
India vs. M/s B.S. Agricultural (I), we are of the considered view that the complaint is barred by
limitation and is liable to be dismissed. Hence, it is dismissed at the admission stage as barred by
limitation.
In Anshul Agarwal Vs. New Okhla Industrial Development Authority, IV (2011) CPJ 62 (SC), it was
observed by the Hon'ble Apex Court that "it is also apposite to observe that while deciding an
application filed in such cases for condonation of delay, the Court has to keep in mind that special
period of limitation has been  prescribed in the Consumer Protection Act for filing appeals and
revisions in consumer matter and the objection of expeditious adjudication of consumer disputes
will get defeated if this court was to entertain highly belated petition against the orders of Consumer
Fora."
We have also to peruse whether time is the sense of Consumer Protection Act. The Constitutional
Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court has given its judgment on  04.03.2020 which is quoted here -  ) A
Constitutional Bench (5 JJ) of the Hon'ble Supreme Court  In the Case of New India Assurance
Complainant Vs. Hilli Multipurpose Cold Storage Private Limited, Civil  Appeal no,10941 -10942 of
2013 along with other many related Civil Appeals( judgment 04.03.2020 ) held ;
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
5
          "The reference made to this Constitution Bench relates to the
grant of time for filing response to a complaint under the provision of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 (for short 'the Act'). 
 
The first question referred is as to whether Section13(2)(a) of the Consumer
Protection Act, which provides for the respondent/opposite  party filing its response
to the complaint within 30 days or such extended period, not exceeding 15 days,
should be read as mandatory of directory; whether the District Forum has power to
extend the time for filing the response beyond the period of 15 days, in addition
to 30 days.
 
The second question which is referred is as to what would be the commencing point
of limitation of 30 days stipulated under the aforesaid section.
The first question was referred by a two Judges bench of this Court vide an order
dated 11.02.2016 passed in Civil Appeal No (s) 10831084 of 2016, M/s Bhasin
Infotech and Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Vs.  M/s  Grand Venezia Buyers Association (
Reg), the relevant portion of which is as under :
"there is an apparent conflict between the decision of this Court in Topline Shoes
Limited  vs.  Corporation Bank [(2002)6 SCC 33], Kailash  vs.  Nankhu [(2005)4 SCC
480], Salem advocate Bar Association Vs. Union of India [(2005) 6 SCC 344] on the
one hand and  J J Merchant & Ors. Vs. Shrinath Chaturvedi [(2002) 6 SCC 635)] and
NIA Vs. Hilli Multipurpose Cold Storage [2014 AIOL 4615] on the other in so far as
the power of the courts to extend time for filing of Written Statement/reply to a
complaint is concerned. The earlier mentioned line of decision take the view that the
relevant provisions including those of Order 8 Rule 1 of the Civil Procedure Code
1908 are directory in nature and the Courts concerned have the power to extend time
for filing the written statement. The second line of decisions which are also of
coordinate Benches however takes a contrary view and hold that when it comes to
power of the Consumer Fora to extend the time for filing a reply there is no such
power. Since the question that falls for determination here often arises before the
Consumer Fora and Commissions all over the country it will be more appropriate if
the conflict is resolved by an authoritative judgment. Further since the conflict is
between Benches comprising three Judges we deem it fit to refer these appeals to a
five - Judge Bench to resolve the conflict once and for all. While we do so we are
mindful of the fact that in the ordinary course a two - Judge Bench ought to make a
reference to a three - Judge Bench in the first place but in the facts and circumstances
of the case and keeping in view the fact that the conflict is between coordinate
benches That comprising three Judges a reference to 3 Judges may not suffice"
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
6
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in para 41 of the judgment has held:
"To conclude, we hold that our answer to the first question is that The District Forum
has no power to extend the time for filing the response to the complainant beyond the
period of 15 days in addition to 30 days as envisaged under section 13 of the
Consumer Protection Act ; and the answer to the second question is that the
commencing point of limitation of 30 days under Section 13 of the Consumer
Protection Act would be from the date of receipt of the notice accompanied with the
complainant by the opposite party and not mere receipt of the notice of the
complainant."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in para 40 of the judgment has held:
".............. we may, however, clarified that the objection of not having received a copy
of the complaint along with the notice should be raised on the first date itself and not
thereafter, otherwise permitted to be raised at any point later on defeat the very
purpose of the Act, which is to provide simple and speedy Redressal of consumer
disputes."
The explanation given by the appellant is neither convincing nor satisfactory. All the facts show
carelessness on the part of the appellant. There is no exemption for official bank or department
under the Consumer Protection Act and time is the essence of the Consumer Protection Act. The
grounds given are not satisfactory and the application for condonation of delay is liable to be
rejected.  Therefore the present appeal is liable to dismissed as time barred.
ORDER          The appeal is dismissed as time barred.
The stenographer is requested to upload this order on the Website of this Commission today itself. 
          Certified copy of this judgment be provided to the parties as per rules.     
 
          (Vikas Saxena)                         (Rajendra Singh)          
               Member                             Presiding Member
 
 
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
7
 
 
 
Judgment dated/typed signed by us and pronounced in the open court.
Consign to record.
 
 
         (Vikas Saxena)                         (Rajendra Singh)          
               Member                             Presiding Member
Jafri, PA II
Court  2
 
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
8
 
              [HON'BLE MR. Rajendra Singh]  PRESIDING MEMBER 
        [HON'BLE MR. Vikas Saxena]  JUDICIAL MEMBER 
   
U.P. Sahkari Gram Vikas Bank Ltd vs Sudama Mishra on 13 September, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197417731/
9
